---
title: Go Notes
tags: Go
---

# Compile and run Go code
## GOPATH
Go code must reside in a workspace defined by `$GOPATH`. Simply set `export GOPATH=~/gocode` to set the workspace root at `~/gocode`.

## Compile
`go build` compiles the code, but throws away the output. To make your package accessible to the workspace, you need to use `go install` to generate a package file in `pkg/` folder under the workspace.

`go install` compiles source code within a `src` folder and generate an executable in `$GOPATH/bin/` folder.

## Unit test
Go's unit test lives in the package directory and ends in `_test.go`. Tests will be part of the source package, but it won't be built into the package. When we run `go test`, Go compiles everything in the package and synthesize all test functions that begins with `Test`.

# Package
Every Go program is made up of packages. Programs start running in package `main`. 

By convention, the package name is the same as the last element of the import path. For instance, the "`math/rand`" package comprises files that begin with the statement package `rand`.

## Imports
You can import one package per line, such as

```go
import "fmt"
import "math"
```
But the convention is to use "factored" import statement:

```go
import (
	"fmt"
	"math"
)
```

# Exported names

In Go, a name is exported if it begins with a capital letter. For example, `Pizza` is an exported name, as is `Pi`, which is exported from the math package.

`pizza` and `pi` do not start with a capital letter, so they are not exported.

When importing a package, you can refer only to its exported names. Any "unexported" names are not accessible from outside the package.


# Variables
## Type declaration
C-family uses prefix, as well as Java:

```c
int x;
```

However, readability is not very good as we can't read from left to right. Scala use colon syntax:

```scala
x: Int
```

Go uses suffix by dropping the colon:

```go
x int
```

## Varialble declaration

The `var` statement declares a list of variables; as in function argument lists, the type is last. A `var` statement can be at package or function level.

A `var` declaration can include initializers, one per variable. If an initializer is present, the type can be omitted; the variable will take the type of the initializer. A list of variables can be assigned by one initializer statement:

```go
var c, python, java = true, false, "no!"
```

## Short variable declarations

Inside a function, the `:=` short assignment statement can be used in place of a `var` declaration with implicit type. 

##  Zero value
Variables declared without an explicit initial value are given their zero value.

The zero value is:

* `0` for numeric types,
* `false` for the boolean type
* `""` (the empty string) for strings.

## Constants
Constants are declared like variables, but with the `const` keyword.

```go
const Pi = 3.14
```

Constants cannot be declared using the := syntax. 

Numeric constants are high-precision values. An untyped constant takes the type needed by its context, so a numeric constant can be passed to functions as int or float64 without any explict conversion.

# Basic types

Go's basic types are

* bool
* string
* int  int8  int16  int32  int64
* uint uint8 uint16 uint32 uint64 uintptr
* byte // alias for uint8
* rune // alias for int32, represents a Unicode code point
* float32 float64
* complex64 complex128

Variable declarations may be "factored" into blocks, as with import statements.

```go
var (
	ToBe   bool       = false
	MaxInt uint64     = 1<<64 - 1
	z      complex128 = cmplx.Sqrt(-5 + 12i)
)
```

The `int`, `uint`, and `uintptr` types are usually 32 bits wide on 32-bit systems and 64 bits wide on 64-bit systems. When you need an integer value you should use int unless you have a specific reason to use a sized or unsigned integer type.

## Type conversions

The expression `T(v)` converts the value `v` to the type `T`. Unlike in C, Go assignment between items of different type requires an explicit conversion. 

## Type inference
When declaring a variable without specifying an explicit type (either by using the `:=` syntax or `var =` expression syntax), the variable's type is inferred from the value on the right hand side. When the right hand side of the declaration is typed, the new variable is of that same type. But when the right hand side contains an untyped numeric constant, the new variable may be an `int`, `float64`, or `complex128` depending on the precision of the constant.

# Data strcutures
## Pointer
The type `*T` is a pointer to a `T` value. Its zero value is `nil`. 

```go
var p *int
```

The `&` operator generates a pointer to its operand.

```go
i := 42
p = &i
```

The `*` operator denotes the pointer's underlying value.

```go
fmt.Println(*p) // read i through the pointer p
*p = 21         // set i through the pointer p
```

Unlike C, Go has no pointer arithmetic.

## Structs
A `struct` is a collection of fields. And a `type` declaration associates the name with the struct.

```go
type Vertex struct {
	X int
	Y int
}
```
Struct fields are accessed using a dot.

```go
v := Vertex{1, 2}
v.X = 4
```

### Pointers to structs
To access the field `X` of a struct when we have the struct pointer `p` we could write `(*p).X`. However, the language permits us instead to write just `p.X`.

### Struct literals
A struct literal denotes a newly allocated struct value by listing the values of its fields. You can list just a subset of fields by using the `Name: ` syntax, and the order of named fields is irrelevant. The special prefix `&` returns a pointer to the struct value. 

```go
v1 = Vertex{1, 2}  // has type Vertex
v2 = Vertex{X: 1}  // Y:0 is implicit
v3 = Vertex{}      // X:0 and Y:0
p  = &Vertex{1, 2} // has type *Vertex
```

## Array
The type `[n]T` is an array of `n` values of type `T`.

```go
var a [10]int
primes := [6]int{2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13} // array literal
```
An array's length is part of its type, so arrays cannot be resized.

### Slices
A slice is a dynamically-sized, flexible view into the elements of an array. In practice, slices are much more common than arrays. The type `[]T` is a slice with elements of type `T`. `array[start:end]` produces a slice from `start` (inclusive) to `end` (exclusive) of `array`, same as Python. The high or low bounds can be omitted, and low and high bounds default to 0 and length of the array, same as Python.

```go
var s []int = primes[1:4]
```

A slice does not store any data, it just describes a section of an underlying array. Changing the elements of a slice modifies the corresponding elements of its underlying array.

`[]bool{true, true, false}` creates an array of length 3, and then builds a slice that reference it.

A slice has both a length and a capacity.

* The length of a slice is the number of elements it contains.
* The capacity of a slice is the number of elements in the underlying array, counting from the first element in the slice.

The length and capacity of a slice s can be obtained using the expressions `len(s)` and `cap(s)`.

You can extend a slice's length by re-slicing it, provided it has sufficient capacity.

#### Nil slices
The zero value of a slice is `nil`. A `nil` slice has a length and capacity of 0 and has no underlying array.

#### Creating a slice with `make`

Slices can be created with the built-in `make` function; this is how you create dynamically-sized arrays. The `make` function allocates a zeroed array and returns a slice that refers to that array:

```go
a := make([]int, 5)  // len(a)=5
```

To specify a capacity, pass a third argument to `make`:

```go
b := make([]int, 0, 5) // len(b)=0, cap(b)=5
b = b[:cap(b)] // len(b)=5, cap(b)=5
b = b[1:]      // len(b)=4, cap(b)=4
```

#### Multi-dimension slice
Slices can contain any type, including other slices. 

```go
// Create a tic-tac-toe board.
board := [][]string{
	[]string{"_", "_", "_"},
	[]string{"_", "_", "_"},
	[]string{"_", "_", "_"},
}
```

#### Apprend
```go
func append(s []T, vs ...T) []T
```

The first parameter `s` of `append` is a slice of type `T`, and the rest are `T` values to append to the slice.

The resulting value of append is a slice containing all the elements of the original slice plus the provided values.

If the backing array of `s` is too small to fit all the given values a bigger array will be allocated. The returned slice will point to the newly allocated array. 

## Map
```go
var m map[string]int
m := make(map[string]int)
var m = map[string]int {
	"Bell Labs": 1,
	"Google": 2,
}
```

The zero value of a map is `nil`. A `nil` map has no keys, nor can keys be added.

The `make` function returns a map of the given type, initialized and ready for use.

* Insert or update an element in map m: `m[key] = elem`
* Retrieve an element: `elem = m[key]`
* Delete an element: `delete(m, key)`
* Test that a key is present with a two-value assignment: `elem, ok = m[key]`. If `key` is in `m`, `ok` is `true`. If not, `ok` is `false`. If key is not in the map, then elem is the zero value for the map's element type. 


# Control
## For loop
Go has only one looping construct, the `for` loop. 

Unlike other languages like C, Java, or Javascript there are no parentheses surrounding the three components of the `for` statement and the braces { } are always required.

```go
for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {
	sum += i
}
```

The init and post statement are optional. When both are omitted, it is essentially a while loop, and the semicolons can be dropped:

```go
for sum < 1000 {
	sum += sum
}
```

Moreover, `for {  }` is the infinite loop.

### Range
The range form of the for loop iterates over a slice or map.

When ranging over a slice, two values are returned for each iteration: the first is the index, and the second is a copy of the element at that index.

```go
for index, value := range slice {
}
```

You can skip the index or value by assigning to _. If only the index is wanted, `, value` can be dropped entirely.

```go
for _, value := range slice {
}

for index := range slice {
}
```

## If
Go's `if` statements are like its `for` loops; the expression need not be surrounded by parentheses ( ) but the braces { } are required.

The braces for `else` statements are also required.

### If with a short statement
Like `for`, the `if` statement can start with a short statement to execute before the condition.

```go
if v := math.Pow(x, n); v < lim {
	return v
}
```
Variables declared by the statement are only in scope until the end of the `if`. 

## Switch
A `case` body breaks automatically, unless it ends with a `fallthrough` statement.

Switch cases evaluate cases from top to bottom, stopping when a case succeeds. A `default` can be supplied at the end.

Like `if`, the expression need not be surrounded by parentheses ( ) but the braces { } are required. And a short statement can be supplied.

### Switch with no condition
Switch without a condition is the same as `switch true`.

This construct can be a clean way to write long if-then-else chains.

## Defer
A `defer` statement defers the execution of a function until the surrounding function returns.

The deferred call's arguments are evaluated immediately, but the function call is not executed until the surrounding function returns. 

Deferred function calls are pushed onto a stack. When a function returns, its deferred calls are executed in last-in-first-out order. 


# Function
A function can take zero or more arguments. Notice that the type comes after the variable name.

```
func add(x int, y int) int {
	return x + y
}
```	
When two or more consecutive named function parameters share a type, you can omit the type from all but the last. For example, `x int, y int` can be written as `x, y int`.

## Return values
A function can return any number of results. Output definition is in parenthesis: `func swap(x, y string) (string, string)` returns two strings.

### Named return values

Go's return values may be named. If so, they are treated as variables defined at the top of the function. These names should be used to document the meaning of the return values.

A return statement without arguments returns the named return values. This is known as a "naked" return. Naked return statements should be used only in short functions, as with the example shown here. They can harm readability in longer functions.

For example,

```
func split(sum int) (x, y int) {
	x = sum * 4 / 9
	y = sum - x
	return
}
```

## Function values
Functions are values too. They can be passed around just like other values. Function values may be used as function arguments and return values.

### Function closure
Go functions may be closures. A closure is a function value that references variables from outside its body. The function may access and assign to the referenced variables; in this sense the function is "bound" to the variables.

For example, the `adder` function returns a closure. Each closure is bound to its own sum variable. 
```go
func adder() func(int) int {
	sum := 0
	return func(x int) int {
		sum += x
		return sum
	}
}
```

## Method
Go does not have classes. However, you can define methods on types. A method is a function with a special *receiver* argument. The receiver appears in its own argument list between the `func` keyword and the method name.

```go
func (v Vertex) Abs() float64 {
	return math.Sqrt(v.X*v.X + v.Y*v.Y)
}
```

A method is just a function with a receiver argument.

You can only declare a method with a receiver whose type is defined in the same package as the method. You cannot declare a method with a receiver whose type is defined in another package (which includes the built-in types such as int).

### Point receivers
You can declare methods with pointer receivers. This means the receiver type has the literal syntax `*T` for some type `T`. (Also, `T` cannot itself be a pointer such as `*int`.)

```go
func (v *Vertex) Scale(f float64) {
	v.X = v.X * f
	v.Y = v.Y * f
}
```

Methods with pointer receivers can modify the value to which the receiver points. Since methods often need to modify their receiver, pointer receivers are more common than value receivers. With a value receiver, the method operates on a copy of the original value. This is the same behavior as for any other function argument.

Methods with pointer receivers can be called on values directly, i.e. `v.Scale(5)` is the same as `(&v).Scale(5)` when `Scale` has a pointer receiver. Methods with value receivers take either a value or a pointer as the receiver when they are called, i.e. `p.Abs()` is interpreted as `(*p).Abs()`.

Pointer receivers are more convenient. The first reason is so that the method can modify the value that its receiver points to. The second is to avoid copying the value on each method call. In general, all methods on a given type should have either value or pointer receivers, but not a mixture of both.

# Interface
An *interface type* is defined as a set of method signatures. A value of interface type can hold any value that implements those methods.

A type implements an interface by implementing its methods. There is no explicit declaration of intent, no "implements" keyword. Implicit interfaces decouple the definition of an interface from its implementation, which could then appear in any package without prearrangement. 

Under the covers, interface values is a tuple of a value and a concrete type: `(value, type)`. An interface value holds a value of a specific underlying concrete type. Calling a method on an interface value executes the method of the same name on its underlying type. 

## Interface values with `nil` underlying values

If the concrete value inside the interface itself is `nil`, the method will be called with a `nil` receiver. In some languages this would trigger a null pointer exception, but in Go it is common to write methods that gracefully handle being called with a nil receiver.

Note that an interface value that holds a `nil` concrete value is itself non-nil.

## `Nil` interface values

A `nil` interface value holds neither value nor concrete type. Calling a method on a `nil` interface is a run-time error because there is no type inside the interface tuple to indicate which concrete method to call.

## The empty interface

The interface type that specifies zero methods is known as the empty interface:`interface{}`.

An empty interface may hold values of any type as every type implements at least zero methods. Empty interfaces are used by code that handles values of unknown type. For example, fmt.Print takes any number of arguments of type `interface{}`.

## Type assertions
A type assertion provides access to an interface value's underlying concrete value.

```go
t := i.(T)
```

This statement asserts that the interface value `i` holds the concrete type `T` and assigns the underlying `T` value to the variable `t`. If i does not hold a `T`, the statement will trigger a panic.

To test whether an interface value holds a specific type, a type assertion can return two values: the underlying value and a boolean value that reports whether the assertion succeeded.

```go
t, ok := i.(T)
```

If `i` holds a `T`, then `t` will be the underlying value and `ok` will be true. If not, `ok` will be false and t will be the zero value of type T, and no panic occurs. It's similar to reading from a map.

## Type switches

A type switch is a construct that permits several type assertions in series. A type switch is like a regular switch statement, but the cases in a type switch specify types (not values), and those values are compared against the type of the value held by the given interface value.

```go
switch v := i.(type) {
case T:
    // here v has type T
case S:
    // here v has type S
default:
    // no match; here v has the same type as i
}
```

The declaration in a type switch has the same syntax as a type assertion `i.(T)`, but the specific type `T` is replaced with the keyword `type`.

This switch statement tests whether the interface value `i` holds a value of type `T` or `S`. In each of the `T` and `S` cases, the variable `v` will be of type `T` or `S` respectively and hold the value held by `i`. In the default case (where there is no match), the variable `v` is of the same interface type and value as `i`.

## Common interfaces
### Stringers

One of the most ubiquitous interfaces is Stringer defined by the fmt package.

```go
type Stringer interface {
    String() string
}
```

A Stringer is a type that can describe itself as a string. The fmt package (and many others) look for this interface to print values.

### Errors

Go programs express error state with error values. The error type is a built-in interface similar to `fmt.Stringer`:

```go
type error interface {
    Error() string
}
```

(As with `fmt.Stringer`, the `fmt` package looks for the error interface when printing values.)

Functions often return an error value, and calling code should handle errors by testing whether the error equals `nil`.

```go
i, err := strconv.Atoi("42")
if err != nil {
    fmt.Printf("couldn't convert number: %v\n", err)
    return
}
fmt.Println("Converted integer:", i)
```

A nil error denotes success; a non-nil error denotes failure.

### Readers

The `io` package specifies the `io.Reader` interface, which represents the read end of a stream of data. The Go standard library contains many implementations of these interfaces, including files, network connections, compressors, ciphers, and others.

The io.Reader interface has a Read method:

```go
func (T) Read(b []byte) (n int, err error)
```

Read populates the given byte slice with data and returns the number of bytes populated and an error value. It returns an `io.EOF` error when the stream ends.

# Concurrency
## Goroutines
A goroutine is a lightweight thread managed by the Go runtime.

```go
go f(x, y, z)
```

starts a new goroutine running

```go
f(x, y, z)
```

The evaluation of f, x, y, and z happens in the current goroutine and the execution of f happens in the new goroutine.

Goroutines run in the same address space, so access to shared memory must be synchronized.

## Channels

Channels are a typed conduit through which you can send and receive values with the channel operator, <-. The data flows in the direction of the arrow.

```go
ch <- v    // Send v to channel ch.
v := <-ch  // Receive from ch, and
           // assign value to v.
```   


Like maps and slices, channels must be created before use:

```go
ch := make(chan int)
```

By default, sends and receives block until the other side is ready. This allows goroutines to synchronize without explicit locks or condition variables.

A sender can close a channel to indicate that no more values will be sent. Receivers can test whether a channel has been closed by assigning a second parameter to the receive expression:

```go
v, ok := <-ch
```

`ok` is false if there are no more values to receive and the channel is closed.

The loop for `i := range c` receives values from the channel repeatedly until it is closed. 

`close(ch)` closes a channel. Only the sender should close a channel, never the receiver. Sending on a closed channel will cause a panic. Channels aren't like files; you don't usually need to close them. Closing is only necessary when the receiver must be told there are no more values coming, such as to terminate a range loop.

### Buffered Channels

Channels can be buffered. Provide the buffer length as the second argument to `make` to initialize a buffered channel:

```go
ch := make(chan int, 100)
```

Sends to a buffered channel block only when the buffer is full. Receives block when the buffer is empty. Thus writing to a full channel before anyone can read from it is a deadlock.

### Select

The select statement lets a goroutine wait on multiple communication operations.

A select blocks until one of its cases can run, then it executes that case. It chooses one at random if multiple are ready. **It runs only once.**

```go
select {
case msg1 := <-c1:
	fmt.Println("received", msg1)
case msg2 := <-c2:
	fmt.Println("received", msg2)
default:
	// Non-blocking operation
}
```

The `default` case in a select is run if no other case is ready. Use a default case to try a send or receive without blocking.

## Mutex
Go's standard library provides mutual exclusion with `sync.Mutex` and its two methods: `Lock` and `Unlock`.

We can define a block of code to be executed in mutual exclusion by surrounding it with a call to `Lock` and `Unlock`. We can ensure `Unlock` is called properly using `defer`.

```go
func SafeInc(mux sync.Mutex, counter *int) {
	mux.Lock()
	*counter++
	mux.Unlock()
}

func SafeInc2(mux sync.Mutex, counter *int) {
	mux.Lock()
	defer mux.Unlock()
	*counter++
	}
```