---
title: Learning Scala - IO
tags: Scala
---

Scala provides a few extensions to Java's IO library.

## Text
### Output
`print()` and `println()`: the latter adds a newline to the end.

`printf()` supports C-style format string.

### Input
`readLine()` read a line of input. It can specify a prompt string.

`readInt(), readDouble()` etc can read a proper type value, but no prompt string can be supplied.

## File
### Input
* Open a file: use `scala.io.Source` object: `val source = Source.fromFile(filename, encoding)`. Filename can be a string or a `java.io.File`. Encoding can be omitted.
* Read from other sources: use `Source.fromURL(URL, encoding)`, `Source.fromString(s)`, and `Source.stdin` to read from URL, String, and standard input.
* Read lines: `val lineIterator = source.getLines`. The result is an iterator. It can be used to process line-by-line in a for loop, or convert to array/buffer using `toArray`/`toBuffer`.
* Read whole file: `source.mkString`.
* Read character: use `source` object directly. If you want to peek without moving the header, call `val iter = source.buffered` to get a buffered object.
* Split by token: `val tokens = source.mkString.split("\\s+")` splits by whitespace.

Binary files: Scala has no specific way to read binary files. Use Java library instead.

### Output
To write a text filem use `java.io.PrintWriter`.

### Directories
Fall back to Java libraries.

### Serialization
`@SerialVersionUID(0L) class Person extends Serializable`. Then to send an object, use instance of `ObjectOutputStream` and call `writeObject(obj)` method. To receive an object, use instance of `ObjectInputStream` and call `in.readObject().asInstanceOf[Class]` to convert to the right type.

Scala collections are serializable.
