---
layout: "post"
title: "Go-Misc"
date: "2018-02-17 20:06"
tags: Go
---



# Go Workspace
Go is designed to work when your code is inside a workspace. The workspace is a folder composed of `bin`, `pkg` and `src` subfolders. In short, create a `go` folder with a `src` subfolder wherever you expect to put your projects. The workspace defined by `$GOPATH`. Simply set `export GOPATH=~/gocode` to set the workspace root at `~/gocode`.

# Compile
Go is a compiled language. It is compiled to assembly language. `go build` compiles the code, but throws away the output. To make your package accessible to the workspace, you need to use `go install` to generate a package file in `pkg/` folder under the workspace.

`go install` compiles source code within a `src` folder and generate an executable in `$GOPATH/bin/` folder.

`go run` is a handy command that compiles and runs your code.

# Run
In Go, the entry point to a program has to be a function called `main` within a package `main`.

# Code Formatting

`go fmt` command formats your code using Go's authoritative formatting rules. When you're inside a project, you can apply the formatting rule to it and all sub-projects via

```bash
go fmt ./...
```

# Comment
Go provides C-style `/* */` block comments and C++-style `//` line comments. Line comments are the norm; block comments appear mostly as package comments, but are useful within an expression or to disable large swaths of code.

The program `godoc` processes Go source files to extract documentation about the contents of the package. Comments that appear before top-level declarations, with no intervening newlines, are extracted along with the declaration to serve as explanatory text for the item. The nature and style of these comments determines the quality of the documentation `godoc` produces.

# Unit test
Go's unit test lives in the package directory and ends in `_test.go`. Tests will be part of the source package, but it won't be built into the package. When we run `go test`, Go compiles everything in the package and synthesize all test functions that begins with `Test`.
